Aid agencies and Arab leaders are
warning of a looming catastrophe in
Israel's plannned offensive against Rafa
in southern Gaza prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu has ordered civilians to leave
before the assault begins more than a
million displaced Palestinians are
Sheltering in the city as Israel battles
Hamas which many countries classify as a
terror
organization Palestinians mourn the dead
in Rafa outside of the last partially
functional hospitals inside the Gaza
Strip according to the Hamas run Health
Ministry more than 28,000 Palestinians
have been killed since the fighting
started 4 months
ago Israeli air strikes pummeled the
southern Border City of Rafa ahead of an
expected ground offensive on the densely
crowded city which has become a last
refuge for displaced Palestinians
fleeing fighting further north and an
estimated 1.4 million people are
Sheltering in Rafa many of them in
makeshift tents finding enough food
water and fuel is a daily struggle they
say they have nowhere left to
go this is the last safe
Zone they told us that Rafa would be
safe from military
operations now they are saying an
operation is to take place here and we
are supposed to leave
of course we heard netanyahu's
statements about the evacuation of
residents from Rafa for a military
operation we came from Gaza City we
don't know where we'll go if we leave
here where will we go with our children
women and
wounded the US has warned Israel an
invasion of Rafa would be a disaster Aid
groups say it's impossible to evacuate
everyone from the city the EU and the UN
are also expressing alarm at Israel's
plans to evacuate Rafa in order to root
out Hamas militants it says are hold up
there the office of the coordination of
humanitarian Affairs say the unprecedent
in density of Rafa's population make it
nearly impossible to protect civilians
uh in the event of ground attacks Ocha
says the congestion in Rafa has reached
a point where normal routs are blocked
by tents set by families seeking any
flat clean surface
available Israeli troops are pressing
deeper into hanun smoke can be seen
billowing over the city located less
than 16 km away Rafa is the last major
population Center in the Gaza Strip
Israeli troops have yet to enter it's
also the main point of entry for
desperately needed relief
supplies samah Hadid is a spokesperson
for the Norwegian Refugee Council and
she joins us now from the Jordanian
Capital Aman Uh sama we in the media
sound like uh broken records but one
can't overstate just how densely
populated the city of Rafa is now barely
containing some 1.4 million people how
are those people
surviving well what we're hearing from
our staff on the ground in Rafa is that
the conditions are already dire uh we're
seeing a widespread uh
diseases even starvation amongst the
population so any fullscale military
operation from Israel uh would lead to
catastrophic
situations uh and really would lead to
the collapse of the aid system because a
lot of the aid is being
distributed uh from the area of Rafa and
we also have the ra Crossing where AID
is is entering into Gaza so it would be
a catastrophic situation and an
expansion of hostilities could also turn
RAF into a zone of Bloodshed and lead to
uh more civilian deaths and and
casualties and this must be prevented at
all costs I want to dig a little deeper
into those hostilities the Israeli Prime
Minister is asking the Army to draw up
evacuation plans but any idea where
these people can or will likely
go there are very few options left for
people to seek safety in Gaza nowhere is
safe anymore uh over 1 million people uh
fled to Gaza were moved into Gaza on the
basis rather RAF on the basis that it
was a safe Zone uh and people there are
panicking and are really scared about
what is to come because there are no
options left for them to seek safety uh
it's unreal realistic it's also inhumane
uh to make people flee once again uh
under bombardment and into areas that
are are not safe uh so we're pleading
with the International Community with
allies of the Israeli government to stop
this from happening to prevent this
bloodbath uh that will occur if the
Israeli uh military operation in Raa
does move ahead well let's be frank many
NOS like yours TR to say appear to have
little leverage on what the Israeli
military will actually do many noos have
asked for ceasefire but the Israeli
Prime Minister has made it fairly clear
that's unlikely how is your organization
preparing for this massive movement or
of people or this offensive or both um
is there a
plan well like all Aid agencies uh we do
prepare uh uh for for the delivery of
Aid uh and life-saving assistance uh
whether under bombardment uh or uh in uh
situations of a humanitarian pause but
it it cannot be delivered safely to
people uh in need of humanitarian
assistance and our Aid workers cannot
work safely under bombardment and this
is why we've been pleading uh with
Israel and the International Community
to support a ceasefire because this is
vital for scaling up Aid and for saving
lives and it's beyond time that further
action is taken uh by allies of the
Israeli government including the UK us
and German governments to put pressure
on Israel to support a ceasefire this is
crucial now uh especially as we have
this looming um military offensive in
Rafa that will lead to more Bloodshed s
Hadid from the norw Refugee Council
thank you so much for your
time now let's get more about the
situation on the ground from Sarah Al
Lee she's with save the children and
joins us from Aman in Jordan Sarah is
safe the children operating in Rafa
right now and what's the situation in
Rafa the situation in Rafa is
catastrophic right now us like many
other Aid organizations uh using Rafa as
it's the only entry point for Aid into
the Gaza right now this is drips and
drabs of Aid getting through so some
days we get more food water medical
supplies but it is a vital lifeline and
we know that if the Israeli military
expand their military operation in Gaza
and in Rafa particularly it will likely
be the deadliest chapter of the conflict
so far this is a small area 62 Square km
where 1.3 million people are currently
Sheltering in the open air in the desert
in small tents we've got hundreds of
thousands of rows of tents and people
entire families cramped into those and
the thought of air strikes or explosive
weapons going off in such a densely
populated area the consequences would be
catastrophic now the Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has told the
Army to evacuate the civilians that are
in Rafa uh where can they be moved to
there is nowhere for civilians to go in
Gaza right now we know that people had
already been given these evacuation
orders and they were told to leave North
Gaza and Central Gaza Palestinians have
been moved time and time again now there
is absolutely nowhere safe to go in Gaza
the prospect of returning North is
inconceivable entire neighborhoods have
been wiped out there are there is Rubble
covering the floors but also unexploded
weapons and the remnants of War this is
a completely unsafe environment to
expect families and children to return
to are you in contact uh with the
Israeli government with regard to
getting more Aid
in our staff on the ground uh in
continuous Communications with all
parties to try and ensure that as much
Aid gets through as possible and these
conversations are usually facilitated by
the UN but the reality is that all of
our Aid organizations are unable to
sustainably provide humanitarian support
because every day we're not seeing a
consistent amount of enough Aid getting
through even before the recent
escalations in violence 80% of gaza's
population depended on International Aid
and now we know that the need is so
severe the entire health system has been
decimated the entire population is on
the brink of famine people are rationing
food water medical supplies are
completely running out so there is a
limited amount of Aid getting through
and the only solution to this is a
ceasefire a definitive ceasefire so that
humanitarian Aid organizations like
ourselves can go in and administer the
life saving Aid that is so desperately
needed right now sorry Ali there at save
the children thank you very
much